---
title: A list, not a lens
date: 2025-07-14
draft: false
---
In the conclusion of _Abundance_, Ezra Klein (of _The New York Times_) and Derek Thompson (of _The Atlantic_) share that they considered naming their yet-to-be-named book “The Abundance Agenda.” They decided against that, choosing “Abundance” instead, hoping that their ideas would constitute something more than a wishlist of policy proposals or a “how-to” guide. In their own words, _Abundance_ seeks to emulate the environmentalism movement, which was a “legislative sea change, a legal revolution, [and] a cultural phenomenon.” The problems that plague rail track construction in California and grant funding at the National Institutes of Health are distinct enough to make writing a comprehensive policy program infeasible; Klein and Thompson, after all, have full-time jobs and cannot take a decade off to solve every single regulatory puzzle across the United States. _Abundance_ is, then, “a lens, not a list.”

Laudable. But not enough.

_Abundance_, a polemic against our last half-century of stagnation, argues that liberals have effectively hamstrung the government, rendering it powerless to solve problems. Beginning in the 1960s and 70s, a rising faction on the left began to view the government as the source of our problems, not as a potential troubleshooter. After the Pentagon Papers, the ever-lasting legacy of slavery, and rapidly increasing environmental harm, I don’t blame them. Activists like Ralph Nader sought to amplify the voices of everyday citizens to serve as another check against the vices of big government. Landmark legislation was passed in response to growing discontent. For example, Richard Nixon (read: Republican) signed the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) in 1970, which required federal government agencies to assess environmental impacts before making decisions. Shortly following that, Ronald Reagan (read: another Republican), then the governor of California, signed the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), which required any project that needed government approval to assess environmental impact, massively expanding the scope of what was considered a “public project,” adding countless hours of paperwork to new developments.

This isn’t the whole story of _Abundance_, but it’s the most covered part. Abundance sells, as an idea, because it’s unbelievably simple and offers a straightforward plan of action for Democrats after their 2024 walloping. Klein, in a [recent Times op-ed](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/08/opinion/abundance-democrats-future.html), wrote, “[b]efore ‘Abundance’ came out, I worried that its argument would be too agreeable to generate much debate.” After reading the book, I can see why he worried. For a book written for those on the left, I wouldn’t be surprised if many on the right agreed with many of the conclusions. What causes homelessness? Housing scarcity! Why don’t we have enough housing? Too much red tape! How can we fix it? Cut red tape! DOGE sucked, but I haven’t met many Americans who desire more bureaucracy. _Abundance_ also sells because the core thesis is simple and popular: things should be more abundant. We should have more housing, more energy, more inventions, more everything. Who doesn’t want that?

Much of the criticism of _Abundance_ has come from the populist left, who argue that _Abundance_ isn’t necessarily wrong, but that it causes a tradeoff between the seemingly larger, more looming problem: the concentration of power among the rich. Corporate money in politics drives lawmakers to sign legislation that [makes life more difficult](https://www.propublica.org/article/inside-turbotax-20-year-fight-to-stop-americans-from-filing-their-taxes-for-free) for Americans. Monopolies, by snuffing out local competition and deflating wages, can [depress entire communities](https://www.theatlantic.com/economy/archive/2024/12/walmart-prices-poverty-economy/681122/). Tax loopholes [widen the gap](https://www.americanprogress.org/article/addressing-tax-system-failings-favor-billionaires-corporations/) between the top 1% and the bottom 99%. To Klein, however, Democrats already know about our inequality problem (it’s bad), whereas abundance, as an idea, is relatively novel. Furthermore, a totalizing view of the bourgeoisie versus the proletariat can overgeneralize the nuance necessary to effect real change. For example, requirements that public projects use union labor and pay a prevailing wage are praiseworthy but, in Klein and Thompson’s view, can hamper progress.

_Abundance_ isn’t the kind of manifesto that requires poring over for days on end; it clocks in at a (relatively) brief 222 pages. In this, however, lies its biggest weakness. Any critic can claim that any given book doesn’t go far enough—it doesn’t expand on X, spend enough time on Y, or ignores Z. However, Klein and Thompson sell _Abundance_ as the Democrats’ future, and to make such a grandiose claim, _Abundance_ required a bit more legwork on certain issues for it to become the 2026 or 2028 playbook. My critique is threefold: first, _Abundance_ mistakes good policy for good politics; second, it underestimates the role that immigration plays in politics; third, it ignores the largest real-world example of abundance politics—artificial intelligence (AI)—which hasn’t been as beneficial as promised. The core idea I want to get across is that _Abundance_ should be read more as a list, not a lens; it cannot and will not be the Democrats’ panacea. However, its policy prescriptions, like those on housing, can offer Democrats a path forward in the coming years.

---

It has been my longstanding view that American voters don’t vote rationally. After the 2024 election, I wrote a lengthy post-mortem in which I described a profound asymmetry between perception and reality. Biden made [little gains among union members](https://www.washingtonpost.com/elections/interactive/2024/exit-polls-2024-election/) despite being the most [pro-union president](https://www.epi.org/publication/bidens-nlrb-restoring-rights/) in American history; Donald J. Trump [fired a member](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/supreme-court-allows-trump-to-fire-labor-board-members/) of the National Labor Relations Board despite posturing with J.D. Vance about being pro-worker. Hispanics in Florida—namely Cubans and Venezuelans—flocked to Republican candidates after succumbing to cries surrounding socialism; [look how that’s going for them](https://apnews.com/article/immigration-humanitarian-parole-china-haiti-nicaragua-venezuela-c10f422939934cf8d1cf8a6f4dfc4610). Voters flocked to the polls because of the economy and _chose Trump_. I’m curious if those same voters celebrated Liberation Day with a commemorative breakfast (without eggs, of course).

My theoretical model is as follows: American politics has been defined by an intense narcissism among the populace. The erosion of subjective sources of meaning and the democratization of dignity have driven an “I know best” attitude among voters (if you’re interested in reading more on this topic, I sketch this out in my previous Substack post [here](https://haven32.substack.com/p/ruminating-on-the-end-of-history); I’d also suggest checking out _Identity_ by Francis Fukuyama). However, they _don’t_ know best. Because of the ambiguity inherent in politics, as parties want to “attract voters on both sides of their net ideological position,” voters are entrusted to make “rational” decisions without full information. And because said voters can hardly keep up with every single issue, they pursue “shortcuts” that make voting easier, which can deviate from reality (if you’re interested in reading more on this topic, I also sketch this out in my final paper for Intro to American Politics, Fall 2023, linked [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-hv0DglaxzZYO2NIWwRs8j5665ZnD9WvwFXzOkCNJW0/edit?usp=sharing)). As the gap between perception and reality widens, a large majority of American voters believe what they want to fit preconceived narratives. In this post-truth world, what actually happens isn’t as influential as what people think happens.

In recent months, I’ve found more evidence to support my hypothesis. A study from University of Pennsylvania professor Diana Mutz found that fears of status loss among “traditionally high-status Americans” (White Christian men) [predicted a Trump vote](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29686081/) far more than material economic hardship due to changes in trade from globalization—in other words, actual pocketbooks didn’t define Trump votes. Consumer confidence polls suddenly [inverted shortly after](https://news.gallup.com/poll/655859/economic-confidence-ticks-down-partisans-views-shift.aspx) the election, as Republicans suddenly became more confident in the economy while Democrats’ confidence fell, when nothing had concretely changed in economic policy; those numbers have stayed roughly the same since November, despite Trump’s tariff policy. If you’re living the sweet life, but Fox News/MSNBC is telling you that your country is in peril, you might begin to think that things aren’t going so well.

Klein, when [discussing a recent poll](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/08/opinion/abundance-democrats-future.html) that showed populist campaign messaging running far ahead of “abundance” messaging, wrote, “[i]t reflects a tendency to treat actual problems as secondary to campaign messaging. No matter how well a message polls, it’s not going to solve a problem unless it is right about what is causing the problem in the first place. And Democrats aren’t struggling primarily because they choose the wrong messages. They’re struggling because they fail to solve problems.” He continues to say, “[Brandon] Johnson is the most proudly left-wing big-city mayor in the country. He is happy to attack corporate power and oligarchic control. He’s also the least popular big-city mayor in the country and may well end up as the least popular mayor in Chicago’s history. Policy failure breeds political failure.”

To this, I’d ask: Is Trump emblematic of policy success? When Republicans won the trifecta in 2016, they were infamous for barely getting anything done, and we’re seeing the same dynamic today. The real reason why Democrats struggle is that they're _perceived_ to be unable to solve problems. The problem with Brandon Johnson and other progressive mayors is that they over-promise and under-deliver in ways that are non-negotiable and hyper-visible, like crime. This explains how Chesa Boudin, the Democratic District Attorney in San Francisco (yes, _that_ San Francisco), was recalled within two years. Progressives, often from outsider backgrounds, leverage purist politics that sound good but don’t govern well. However, Johnson’s policy failures aren’t abnormal to the aptly named “Windy City” with its legacy of terrible mayors. Where backlash against progressive candidates has happened, Democratic voters respond by voting for moderate, tough-on-crime candidates (read: Eric Adams) that do a lot of posturing but offer little change other than a return to the status quo, one that people were upset with in the first place that led to people voting for a progressive. The important nuance is that campaigning on bail reform and reducing harsh sentences against non-violent drug offenders has to overwhelmingly succeed to gain acceptance because people don’t like crime. When they inevitably fail, voters respond. So yes, policy failure can breed political failure, but this usually happens on the political extremes in cities. Kathy Hochul, Governor of New York, for example, can get away more scot-free because many people don’t know what a governor is responsible for. Think about why almost all of the 2028 Democratic hopefuls are governors. They don’t have the baggage of being attached to the perpetually unpopular Congress or to low-performing urban areas. My intuition tells me that most people believe their state is doing better than the U.S. as a whole.

That is not to say policy doesn’t matter at all. _Abundance_ offers a good example where Pennsylvania Governor Josh Shapiro fast-tracked the rebuilding of I-95 after portions of the interstate were damaged. After it was rebuilt within weeks, Shapiro’s numbers skyrocketed. However, that’s because I-95 is hyper-visible—it’s I-95—and Shapiro was marketing his success story day in and day out. Not every governmental project is that or can be that. Messaging reigns supreme over policy. Think about why people move to Texas. My best guess is that people believe that housing is cheap, but they don’t attribute it to Greg Abbott or the Republicans. I’d venture that most people don’t think about where housing comes from, just that it’s there. Why do I believe this is true? _Abundance_ tells you itself: politicians on both sides of the aisle have ceded the supply side to focus on the demand side, like tax credits. Housing is viewed as this amorphous blob where it’s either “expensive” or “not." That's not to say Republicans won't benefit from generous housing policy; if things are going well, incumbents will win. However, it's not the direct 1:1 good-policy-to-vote conveyor belt that Klein and Thompson claim.

The best response to Klein comes from himself. In the first chapter of _Abundance_, he (and Thompson) discuss how Democrats should be able to use California as a “role model” for other states to follow. It has the best weather in the U.S., the fifth largest economy in the world (in gross domestic product), fantastic food, beautiful landscapes—the whole shebang. Instead, Republicans are able to run on “Look how awful California is! Don’t trust Democrats with your vote!” _Abundance_ argues that housing is California’s primary problem. I don’t disagree. But I don’t think that fixing housing will resolve California’s problems for precisely that reason. California has an argument to be the best U.S. state and it’s _still_ political fodder for Republicans. It’s wishful thinking that better housing policy will turn California around. Perhaps that’s uncharitable to Klein and Thompson’s argument—I’m sure they don’t think that housing is the be-all-end-all—but I think it’s less impactful than they claim. Democratic-run states have been the best in the U.S. for safety, education, and overall quality of life. Republicans do not win by claiming that West Virginia is the epitome of Republican governance. Aaron Renn, in _Compact Magazine_, [discusses this dynamic](https://www.compactmag.com/article/the-cultural-contradictions-of-conservatism/); the “conservative” aspired-to aesthetic of small-town America, defined by “Norman Rockwell paintings, pictures of cute New England towns, preppy clothing, 1950s family scenes, Beach Boys-era Southern California, and similar things,” is more native to liberal New England towns than Republican strongholds. Sure, maybe people are moving to Florida (although [this claim is dubious](https://www.newsweek.com/number-people-moving-texas-florida-cities-plummets-2060831)), but they’re also moving to Arizona and Georgia, diverse states that have been trending blue for some time.

In short, I don’t think Abundance has enough sticking power as a “theory of power” for Democrats because good policy isn’t always good politics. The following two sections will focus on the two behemoths it ignores: immigration and AI, beginning with the former.

---

Immigration matters. Anyone who has witnessed recent Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) raids in Los Angeles—and the associated outrage—understands that immigration might be the political issue of the 21st century. The left views the U.S. as a haven for immigrants fleeing persecution and seeking better opportunities. The right views the waves of immigrants entering the U.S. with suspicion at best and hatred at worst. Europe’s rightward lurch in the past decade can be attributed solely to the refugee crisis spawned in the aftermath of the Syrian Civil War. Immigration cannot be sidelined or given lip service by politicians.

It’s not my position that _Abundance_ needs to solve _every political issue_. However, Klein and Thompson’s main policy pushes are so intertwined with immigration that it’d be neglectful not to spend at least a bit of time on the hot-button issue of our era. Which, to their credit, they do; we get a whole three pages on immigration. Unsurprisingly, then, _Abundance_’s stance on immigration is woefully incomplete and misses the mark in several key ways.

Klein and Thompson’s focus on immigration comes primarily from their section titled “Invent,” where they lament a system of funding that deprioritizes risky investments in ground-breaking inventions in favor of safer ones in not-so-groundbreaking fields. Recent American inventions have predominantly come from recent (last half-century or so) immigrants, as Klein and Thompson write, “Despite making up only about 14 percent of the US population, immigrants accounted for 23 percent of US patents from 1990 to 2016, 38 percent of US Nobel Prizes in chemistry, medicine, and physics from 2000 to 2023, and more than half of the billion-dollar US start-ups in the last twenty years.” They add that instead of encouraging this innovation, America has stalled progress by stalling immigration, freezing the cap on H-1B visas and promoting a backlog that discourages foreign students from taking their talents to Cambridge, Palo Alto, or South Beach.

Never mind that the H-1B cap (85,000) has so many exceptions that in 2024, nearly 120,000 [new H-1B visas were approved](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ckg87n2ml11o). A claim that “we need more foreign talent” fundamentally ignores the legions of Americans, left and right, who have qualms with the H-1B system. For a firm to apply for an H-1B, it must demonstrate that _no other American on American soil_ can do that job sufficiently enough so that the firm is forced to find outside talent. To the right, that is a direct affront to their perceived exceptionalism of American workers, many of whom could _actually_ do the work that firms claim they can’t do. Outrage over H1-Bs led to a huge rift on the newly elected right between traditional nativists and the techno-populist right (like Elon Musk) who rely on foreign-born workers to swell the ranks of their tech companies. Vivek Ramaswamy was unceremoniously booted from the winning coalition after launching a diatribe on Twitter about how (lightly paraphrasing) Americans are falling behind immigrants because they spend too much time at sleepovers and not enough time at Kumon.

To understand why immigration is today’s political lightning rod requires a slight philosophical detour, beginning with _thymos_, Athenian philosopher Plato's term for the “spiritedness” part of the soul that contains an innate sense of justice connected to a specific level of self-worth. For example, we feel angry when treated poorly, shame when we fall short of personal expectations, and pride when we're adequately recognized. We are constantly vigilant in protecting and promoting our self-worth, and above all, we aim to be recognized by others—for our self-worth to be validated. Thymos has two offspring: _isothymia_, the desire to be recognized as equal to others, and _megalothymia_, the desire to be recognized as superior to others.

German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel later (indirectly) developed thymos to claim that the race for recognition and the desire to be treated with dignity has driven societal progress. Hegel is known for his master-slave dialectic, in which slavery contains inherent contradictions because the master receives incomplete recognition from the slave's subhuman status. As contradictions appear, the world progresses past slavery to one where all humans deserve recognition and dignity, an idea spawned out of the French Revolution. As Fukuyama writes in _Identity_, what we consider “dignity” wasn’t always a universally aspired-to value, as recognition was solely bestowed upon “legendary” figures—warriors and royalty, for example. In recent centuries, the march of human civilization coincided with the “democratization of dignity,” whereby humans began to understand their inner selves as being in conflict—mostly undervalued—with external society, as philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau claimed (which makes sense, given the state of feudalism). Dignity and recognition of one’s self “now centered on the recovery of the authentic inner being, and society’s recognition of the potential that resided in each of its members.” In short: emancipation among the many during the Enlightenment was coupled with the belief that you—yes, you—were destined for something greater (_megalothymia_). And because humans are social animals, we began to demand recognition of not only ourselves, but our groups—be it religious, ethnic, or national. It is this dynamic that led to the rise of nationalism.

Fukuyama paints a portrait to better understand how nationalism became so predominant in post-industrial Europe. Imagine Hans, a young German peasant who grew up in a quaint village. His life, from birth, has essentially been predetermined: he lives in the same 100-year-old house that his great-grandparents did; he's engaged to the stunning girl-from-down-the-street whom his parents found acceptable (by virtue of the town's close-knit ties); and he works the same plot of land his father, and his father's father, did. Hans has never had to ask "Who am I?" because his conception of self is largely predetermined; he is to the manner born.

Yet! News has trickled into Hans' small town. In the nearby Ruhr Valley, factories have popped up like weeds, and the factory owners need workers, badly. Hans, hearing the news, sets off on an adventure to find work. Once in Ruhr, chaos is abound; he lives in a dormitory with Poles, the Dutch, and the French, and easy communication is no longer a given; slapdash laws are crafted to accommodate the massive influx of diverse peoples, disrupting the Ruhr's way of life; and crime increases as the perception of chaos breeds opportunism and as economic demands ingrain themselves into the workers' psyche. Hans, having left behind his rock of a community, begins to struggle with his identity: "Who am I? Why are things so chaotic? Things weren't like this at home." Opportunists unhappy with the status quo ache for a return to the simpler, more pure German life, and Hans buys in: he is a German, heir to greatness, and outside agitators have infiltrated his society, which is why chaos exists. Nationalism spreads like wildfire.

Let's analogize this to current-day America. If you are a white American in Appalachia, you've witnessed poverty. The factories that used to make up your skyline are now abandoned. Opioids have taken over and have wreaked havoc on the local community while rural hospitals have shuttered their doors. You have been forgotten. Meanwhile, you're watching Fox News and you see nonstop media coverage of immigrant caravans invading the country and "taking" your jobs—never mind that the factory owners shipped your factories overseas faster than Amazon Prime same-day delivery once it became profitable to do so. Things are, to say the least, _not going well_.

"New York Times Liberals" who've skimmed J.D. Vance's page-unturner _Hillbilly Elegy_ claim definitively that the story ends here: a cabal of globalists stole jobs from these hardworking Americans and _that's why_ xenophobia is so prevalent. _It makes sense._

It isn't the whole story, though. God-fearing, coal-mining, poor West Virginians don't make up 50% of the electorate. The better answer is that traditional White Americans look at these poor Appalachians and sympathize, but more importantly, fear that they're next up to be served up on a platter to the liberal elite. David Brooks, in _The Atlantic_, [makes a similar argument](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2021/09/blame-the-bobos-creative-class/619492/): while the “GOP gentry”—wealthy(ish) asset-owning families in semi-urban America who are members of the local elite—would be natural enemies of the “proletarian aristocracy”—contractors, plumbers, electricians, and other blue-collar workers—they are aligned out of fears that they are losing status to the liberal elite. Democrats, in recent years, have been unflinching in their full-throated defense of the undocumented. The dominant liberal ideology is one of "openness," where the Statue of Liberty commands us to be sympathetic to new arrivals chasing the American Dream. To Americans who've been here yet have seen declining life expectancies and economic prospects, the Democrats' protection of foreigners is tantamount to betrayal. Refer back to the Mutz study from above: fear of status loss engenders backlash. Americans support mass deportations, even if they're upset at the grotesque nature of camping out at The Home Depot to round up undocumented laborers. For many, America is for Americans, and mass migration is a red line drawn in concrete not to be crossed.

All of this is to say that _Abundance_ requires immigration without addressing immigrant hatred. Klein and Thompson focus on the high-skilled immigrants congregating in San Jose and Plano that drive American innovation, but an equally important group is the "low-skilled" immigrants who bear the brunt of actually building American houses, bridges, and office buildings. Klein and Thompson lament the "Everything Bagel" approach to housing development that supports new construction only if proposals satisfy a laundry list of requirements (e.g., paying workers the prevailing wage). Truthfully, some of the requirements can be nonsensical, but fair wage requirements seem like common sense. The common Democratic retort to calls for mass deportation of “who is going to pick your strawberries, then?” can be infuriating because it should not be a source of pride that poor Mexican workers are toiling for hours on end in the Southern California heat. Obviously, Democrats don't prefer this reality, but Democrats must shift from status quo immigration malaise to supporting widespread, easy pathways to citizenship while acknowledging that the perception of “open borders” is a political no-go. In this world, “low-skilled” immigrants can finally earn a living wage, and while this may raise some costs associated with building, it is undoubtedly more just.

I don't think America suffers from an abundance problem. We suffer a cultural one. Americans fear that we are going in the wrong direction, and our attitudes surrounding immigration reflect this feeling that _Abundance_ perpetuates by uncritically supporting more immigration without offering substantial reform.

Yale professor Samuel Moyn, in [his review of](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/03/18/books/review/abundance-ezra-klein-derek-thompson.html) _[Abundance](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/03/18/books/review/abundance-ezra-klein-derek-thompson.html)_ [for](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/03/18/books/review/abundance-ezra-klein-derek-thompson.html) _[The New York Times](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/03/18/books/review/abundance-ezra-klein-derek-thompson.html)_, asks: Who is Abundance for? Is it for a small group of knowledge workers? Or is it for America? I don’t know.

---

The most well-known _Abundance_ argument is that the left has handicapped the government, leaving it ineffective and unable to perform basic duties. Strenuous rules and regulations have wrested the power from individuals to make responsible choices, leaving decisions to be made by a hodge-podge of disconnected organizations vying for influence: community-based nonprofits, state boards, and municipal committees. Nothing gets done. Slowing down government action may have been wise in the New Deal era, fraught with excess and corruption. However, today, we must turn back the clock on red tape to support American ingenuity. Government should _do things_ while also allowing the private sector to _do its thing_.

It's important to dwell on that last tidbit. _Abundance_ is marketed as a how-to guide to spur government action. However, the authors also recognize that regulations designed to slow government action also had the very intended effect of slowing down the private sector. Apartment buildings shot down by the NIMBY crowd are proposed by money-hungry developers. California’s high-speed rail fiasco has prevented construction supply chains from kicking into full gear. Klein and Thompson spend a bit discussing Ralph Nader, who sought to limit government excess—the same Ralph Nader who rose to prominence after his 1965 book “Unsafe at Any Speed,” which illustrated how car manufacturers resisted adding safety mechanisms to their two-ton killing machines. Ending CEQA allows developers to proceed without drafting environmental impact statements. Sure, maybe the City of San Francisco can more easily build affordable housing units, but the death of CEQA will primarily be a boon to private real estate investors.

So, it’s interesting that _Abundance_ spends little time on the _one_ area our government has abdicated responsibility for. Much has been said about our country’s gerontocracy, and the limitations of a Boomer-filled government are most acute when technology is the central concern. To say the government has been asleep at the wheel when it comes to AI would be an understatement. Lawmakers either don’t understand or care about AI, and this apathy is a reflection of a skepticism that AI will fundamentally reshape our day-to-day lives (at least, in the near future). Biden passed an executive order on AI (summarily revoked by Trump in 2025), but even _that_ didn’t offer much guidance on how the government might consider regulating AI to install safer guardrails. Klein’s [interview with Ben Buchanan](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/03/04/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-ben-buchanan.html), Biden’s AI advisor, revealed that the Biden administration refused to think about thoroughly regulating AI because Democrats didn’t have the votes in Congress. Besides that, the executive order sought to boost America’s competitiveness in AI vis-à-vis China—not slow it down.

Government apathy in AI has been met by a wildly unregulated industry that threatens to send half of all white-collar workers into unemployment benefit lines. Dario Amodei, co-founder of Anthropic, [in an interview with Axios](https://www.axios.com/2025/05/28/ai-jobs-white-collar-unemployment-anthropic), claimed that “AI could wipe out half of all entry-level white-collar jobs — and spike unemployment to 10-20% in the next one to five years,” “AI companies and government need to stop ‘sugar-coating’ what's coming: the possible mass elimination of jobs across technology, finance, law, consulting and other white-collar professions, especially entry-level gigs,” and that, "Most of them are unaware that this is about to happen. It sounds crazy, and people just don't believe it."

Jensen Huang, CEO of NVIDIA, [responded to Amodei’s claims](https://fortune.com/2025/06/11/nvidia-jensen-huang-disagress-anthropic-ceo-dario-amodei-ai-jobs/): “One, he believes that AI is so scary that only they should do it. Two, [he believes] that AI is so expensive, nobody else should do it … And three, AI is so incredibly powerful that everyone will lose their jobs, which explains why they should be the only company building it.” Huang, the Prometheus of AI (owing to NVIDIA’s graphics-processing units), hits on a crucial contradiction within the industry. AI companies claim their products will be world-changing (i.e., harbingers of unemployment), yet they continue to progress and develop their large-language models (LLMs). We get gesturing that AI will be used to augment rather than replace, and that it’ll boost the productivity of workers, but _guess what_—if one individual worker is more productive, a company needs _less workers_. Over time, as AI improves, the number of entry-level workers needed will massively shrink. [Employers from across the U.S. are already initiating layoffs](https://www.wsj.com/business/the-biggest-companies-across-america-are-cutting-their-workforces-a0e8739a)—namely, Microsoft, which laid off over 10,000 in 2025 alone. The companies aren’t hiding why they’re laying off workers, either; in fact, they’re extremely explicit. Amazon CEO, Andy Jassy, [wrote in a June note to employees,](https://www.aboutamazon.com/news/company-news/amazon-ceo-andy-jassy-on-generative-ai) “​​As we roll out more Generative AI and agents, it should change the way our work is done. It’s hard to know exactly where this nets out over time, but in the next few years, we expect that this will reduce our total corporate workforce.” Even if you’re bearish on AI adoption, CEOs willing to cut costs aren’t. The Industrial Revolution has been the story of automation.

It’s useful to focus on one company to demonstrate what AI companies are doing with their freedom. Karen Hao’s _Empires of A.I._ charts the evolution of OpenAI, creator of ChatGPT, from “mission-oriented” to “just-another-Silicon-Valley-startup.” OpenAI, founded in 2015 by a motley gang of Silicon Valley hotshots (Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla; Sam Altman, then-President of Y-Combinator; Greg Brockman, then-CTO of Stripe), purported to develop safe AI. OpenAI made a series of promises to differentiate itself from Silicon Valley’s profit-above-all mindset; to the founders, OpenAI’s mission—to build AI that benefits all of humanity—superseded everything else. They promised to openly share their models and research, to avoid commercialization, and to retain non-profit status to avoid the temptations of for-profit work. Then, reality hit. OpenAI gradually walked back these promises when faced with ever-growing compute costs. For Hao, the story of AI has been the story of empire; tech behemoths like Microsoft, OpenAI’s biggest backer, and Google build data centers in foreign countries like Chile that deplete the natural resources of native communities. Scale AI uses poor Venezuelans to label data. OpenAI pays workers in Kenya pennies to review CSAM images generated by ChatGPT 4o and DALL-E. Foreign resources and workers are being devastated, while at home, AI continues to grow. Much like _Abundance_ is by the urban-knowledge-workers _for_ the urban-knowledge-workers, AI is being built by a small circle in Silicon Valley, and I implore you to guess who it’ll primarily benefit.

The AI companies aren’t going to stop, and the government seemingly has no interest in even touching AI, because leaders in Silicon Valley and Washington have put forth a more sinister boogeyman: China. Supporters of AI claim that the U.S. must beat China in the AI race; otherwise, global AI will be shaped by “Chinese values.” Yes, it’s probably important for the U.S. to have primacy in the AI space, but we’ve surrendered all power to the AI giants because of half-thought-through fearmongering about China. There are legitimate concerns: AI agents launching offensive cyber operations against the U.S would _not be good_. However, I genuinely believe the Washington consensus is that once Chinese AI becomes superintelligent, Xi Jinping will have the power to destabilize the U.S. with the click of a button (which, obviously, is not how that works).

I’m not [Peter Thiel’s Antichrist](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/26/opinion/peter-thiel-antichrist-ross-douthat.html); we shouldn’t stop all AI development today. AI has the potential to cure diseases thought to be incurable. It might generate unbounded economic growth. An abundant future may be right before our eyes. However, I just want the government to _do something_. _Anything_. It’d be reductive to claim that _Abundance_ is _only_ about slashing red tape; the more cohesive argument is that the government should be able to _do things_. But here’s the contradiction: giving the government more authority to take decisive action can both speed up and slow down development. _Abundance_ focuses on things that should be more abundant, but we get silence on whether some things are _too_ abundant. It’s hard to read _Abundance_ and not get flashbacks (or flash-forwards) to the unbelievably obese chair-bound citizens of the Axiom in WALL-E.

Government regulation exists for a reason. Yes, it’s onerous, and yes, Klein and Thompson aren’t saying that the U.S. needs zero regulation. However, a core _Abundance_ argument—that we should allow individuals to make rational decisions instead of blanket “no’s” from government—isn’t as sunshines and rainbows as Klein and Thompson make it seem. Absent guardrails, people will take the easy way out. People will pursue profit above all. David Brooks’s recent _The Atlantic_ piece is [excellent on this question](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2025/07/trump-administration-supporters-good/683441/): the Enlightenment’s privatization of morality has allowed us the space to follow an “aesthetic” life, as Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard referred to: “I make the choices that feel pleasant at the moment, and I just won’t think much about life’s ultimate concerns.” As a result, the commitment to the common good has evaporated, and the incentive to defect in our prisoner’s dilemma world means that the will to make responsible decisions is trumped by the desire to make rational individual choices. In Silicon Valley, that means racing to build superintelligent AI because “someone else will do it first if it isn’t me,” without considering potential negative impacts.

The end of _Abundance_ discusses the other type of politics championed by the right: politics of scarcity. Immigrants are stealing our money; “Welfare queens” are unemployed bums sitting on pizza-stained couches, sapping precious federal resources; NATO militaries are free-riding off the U.S. military; countries around the world are benefitting from sky-high trade deficits. Scarcity politics succeed because they reflect reality: resources aren’t abundant. The issue for _Abundance_ is that in taking the opposite streak, it risks sounding more like a fantasy than an implementable, coherent political ideology.

---

I began this essay with “a list, not a lens.” _Abundance_ should be read as a policy wishlist instead of a coherent political ideology—yes, we should have more housing, energy, and inventions! _Abundance_ is argued well on the specific policy proposals that Klein and Thompson propose, and can provide a way forward for Democratic elected officials desperately looking for policy wins. However, _Abundance_ turned a great critique of 20th-century policymaking into a political polemic, and it strays far outside of its comfort zone. My arguments, while specific, serve to demonstrate three core critiques: first, good policy isn’t always good politics; second, it isn’t necessarily good politics; and third, it isn’t necessarily good policy. I hope for a more abundant future, but the future of the Democratic Party isn’t _Abundance_.